So we'd like to get this session started,
so I'd like to thank you all for coming.
It looks like we have a full house,
which is great to see.
This is the second of three sessions on
audio focusing specifically on Mac OS X.
The first session we did on Wednesday was
to do with the new audio unit and music
services that are being provided on OS X,
as well as the MIDI services.
The MIDI services are obviously at a
lower level to deal with MIDI devices.
The music and audio units
sort of sit up above those,
and so application services
that programs like QuickTime and
other applications would use.
In this session we're going to be
covering the Sound Manager as it
exists on OS X and some revisions
of what's been going on with the
Sound Manager over the last few months.
And then we'll be getting into
the background of the sound
management and the sound processing.
So we've got the sound manager,
which is the lower level interface
that expresses the interface
between your application or the
higher levels of the audio engine
to the particular audio devices,
from an application point of view.
And then in the session following
this we'll be talking about what is
going on underneath that API in the
kernel and in the I/O Kit world.
So without any further ado,
I'll get Jeff Moore to come on,
who's been doing most of
the work in this area,
and make him welcome.
Thank you.
Hi, everybody.
Wow, it is full.
It's good to see there are
this many people who are as
interested in audio as I am.
So let's get started.
So like Bill said,
today we're going to talk a little
bit about the Sound Manager first.
We're going to talk a little bit about
what the Sound Manager can do for you.
Specifically,
we're going to talk a little bit about
how the Sound Manager is implemented.
We're also going to talk a little
bit about what's changed in the
Sound Manager over the past year.
Been a bunch of different versions.
It's been a little bit
of confusion about it.
From that point,
we're going to go into what's new
with OS X and the Core Audio services
that we've been working on.
Then, by the end of this,
hopefully you'll understand where we're
going with all this stuff and you'll be
able to move your own audio data to and
from devices and all over the system.
So first we're going to talk a
little bit about the Sound Manager.
The Sound Manager is available
now on three platforms:
Mac OS X, Mac OS 9, and Win32.
The Mac OS X and Win32 versions are
very similar in terms of feature set.
Mac OS 9 has a few more
features than the other ones.
Then I'll talk a little bit
about things we've changed.
Most notably,
we added variable bitrate decoding,
and we've fixed a bunch of
synchronization bugs recently.
Then I'm going to talk a little
bit more about what we did to bring
it up on Carbon and what's there,
what isn't there.
So, to start off with,
the Sound Manager itself,
we're all pretty familiar with sound
channels and the general procedural
API for playing sound and for
bringing sound into your application.
I thought I'd do a quick review a little
bit about how all that is implemented
under the hood because it's not exactly
clear because a lot of this stuff is
not exposed through the procedural API.
So, under the hood,
all sound channels are implemented
via a network of sound components.
They do all the actual processing
work and moving the data and
massaging it into a format that
you can play or encoding it,
decoding it, whatever.
There are a bunch of different areas
that the Sound Manager focuses on.
Rate conversion is arguably the
most time-expensive thing the
Sound Manager will do for you.
Now,
all these little components are linked
together in pretty much linear chains.
That is, you won't have two inputs
feeding one sound component.
They just have one in, one out.
And then,
all the semantics of the procedural
API are really handled at the low
level by the system mixer component.
It's a pretty monolithic
architecture that...
"It does the job,
but it's beginning to show
its age a little bit."
So this diagram kind of represents
a runtime view of a system using the
Sound Manager and the connections
of the various componentry.
The first two chains you see show what
is typically the full chain you get.
That is, you start with a sound source
component whose job is to be the
traffic cop with the buffer of data
that's being pulled through the chain.
And then you have a decoder component,
which is the component that will
take a stream in one format and
convert it into a format that
the rest of the system can use.
Typically that's a linear PCM format.
And then you have an equalizer component.
The equalizer component
actually has two jobs.
Its first job is to provide the
implementation of the base and trouble
controls that you see in QuickTime.
The second job it has is to
implement the spectrum analyzer
that you see in QuickTime.
To do that, it siphons off the stream and
puts things into a buffer and then
performs the FFT at event time.
This thing will never perform
its FFT at interrupt time.
So it's not too much of a performance
drain if you're not using the equalizer
for actual base and trouble adjustments.
And then finally,
you have a rate converter component.
And the rate converter
component does two roles.
First,
it will take the raw data and convert it
to the rate that you see in QuickTime.
It will convert it to the
rate that the hardware wants.
But it also does the work of
handling the rate multiplier command.
So if you say,
"Play this sound twice as fast,"
it upsamples and then downsamples
to get everything back into the
format that the hardware wants.
And then finally,
everything is junctioned at
the system mixer component.
On Mac OS 9,
you only ever have one mixer component
talking to one output device component.
On Windows and on Mac OS X,
you have one of those.
You have a mixer and an
output device per process.
Everything is handled in user
space for the sound manager.
[Transcript missing]
Go figure.
You'd see a whole bunch
of unstable connections.
Specifically, if you were using tunneling
IP for encryption,
you would have a lot of
trouble trying to get through.
So, variable bitrate decoding was
a very interesting problem
and a very interesting feature
to add to the Sound Manager.
Now, as most of you know,
variable bitrate encoding is a
technique that varies the number
of bits used to encode a sample
or a block of samples over time.
Typically,
this yields better quality encoding
for a lower overall bitrate.
We added that specifically to support
QuickTime's MP3 decoder in QuickTime 4.1.
So to do it,
we had to basically grapple with the
fundamental issue that you don't,
with variable bitrate situations,
quite often you just don't know
the relationship between a buffer's
size in bytes and the number
of samples you're going to get
out of that when you decode it.
And as the Sound Manager is
pretty reliant on the fact
that you know ahead of time the
number of samples in a buffer.
So we had to go and mess things up a
little bit so that we could express
that notion of a buffer size in
terms of the number of bytes it had
rather than the number of samples.
To do this, we ended up extending
three data structures.
The scheduled sound header
needed to be extended so that
you had access to schedule a
block of variable bitrate data.
The sound component data structure
had to be extended so that the
component chains could talk about
variable bitrate data with each other.
And then the sound param block had
to be changed so that the mixer
could keep track of it as well.
In all cases,
what we did to extend these data
structures were we added a new flag
to their flags field that said,
"I'm extended." And then you could cast
that to one of these extended structures
and then you would access to extended
fields that included another flags field.
And the flags field for that was used
to indicate whether the structures was
counting by sample frames or by bytes.
And then the field to actually
hold the byte count as well.
So, in addition to that,
we also revved the Sound Converter
API to better support variable
bitrate situations and,
in fact,
be a better and easier to use system in
general just for any sort of conversion.
So, we added a new routine called
Sound Converter Fill Buffer.
It's a direct replacement for
the functionality you got from
Sound Converter Convert Buffer.
In particular,
the difference is that the mechanism
for moving data through Sound Converter
Fill Buffer is a callback mechanism
where you specify a routine that
the Sound Converter can call to
get more data to decode or encode.
This gives you complete control
over the buffering in the system.
You specify the output buffering when
you call Sound Converter Fill Buffer,
and you have complete control of the
input buffering because you have a
function to feed it into the system.
Finally,
this obviated the need for calling
Sound Converter to get buffer sizes
for really any reason if you're using
Sound Converter Fill Buffer since
you are already in control of all the
information both on input and output.
There's no need to ask the
Sound Converter about it anymore.
So the best place to find more
about this stuff is the recent
QuickTime 4.1 developer update note.
And that's a URL where you
can get the PDF version.
[Transcript missing]
So the other big thing we did
was the Carbon Sound Manager.
And we brought that up for,
I think it was DP2.
Yeah, it first showed up in
Developer Preview 2 of OS X.
So the Sound Manager for Carbon is
pretty much full featured,
with a few exceptions.
Now, in most cases,
the features that we did not choose
to port were primarily because the
functionality was either duplicated by
other services in the Sound Manager,
or indeed on other services in the OS.
But also because the services
that they were providing were
obsolete in a lot of cases.
So, among other things,
these included the wavetable
synthesizer and related commands.
This is things like freak command and,
let's see,
there are a bunch of other ones
that escape me at the moment.
The other big one that we didn't include,
choose to port,
was sound play double buffer.
Sound play double buffer is
probably the most inefficient
mechanism for feeding sound into
the Sound Manager at the moment.
You are much better off to use buffer
commands and callback commands,
or even better yet,
you should be using scheduled sound.
Scheduled sound is far and away the
best way to get sound in and out of
the Sound Manager at a specific time.
We also don't have any support for
recording to or playing from disk.
Again, we feel that these features are
best accomplished through QuickTime.
Then there were a bunch of other sound
commands whose services that we just
don't need anymore or didn't work right.
Some examples of these
are the amp command.
It's pretty much exactly
what the volume command does.
The rate command,
which does sort of what the
rate multiplier command does,
only it has an interesting problem
in that it treats all the rates as if
you were scaling 22 kilohertz sound,
which can give you unpredictable
results if you're not sure
ahead of time what you're doing.
Then there's commands
like the load command,
which were about querying registers
on the old Apple sound chip.
I don't think anybody was using those.
At least I hope not.
So, ultimately,
where this leaves us right now is that
we have a system that's pretty well
optimized for handling 16-bit words,
stereo channel formats,
with a 44.1 kilohertz sampling rate.
Now, we support constant and
variable bitrate formats,
usually the simpler variety of those.
And we're using a lot,
we're seeing native
processing coming along,
we're using a lot of it ourselves.
And we've also got a fairly
loose synchronization model,
all things said and done.
But it's doing the job pretty
much for what we have to do today.
So going forward,
the sorts of things that we see
coming down the road are at the
hardware we see 24-bit integer
formats coming straight at us.
And then in the software realm,
you see a very heavy reliance on
32-bit floating point to support
all the bandwidth you need.
And then in channel formats,
surround sound is just
beginning to take off now.
You're seeing it more and
more at the consumer level.
more at the authoring level.
A lot of games are being authored in 5.1.
And in the pro market,
you're starting -- in
the authoring market,
you're seeing much higher sampling rates
than what we've been used to in the past.
96 kilohertz certainly looks
like it's going to be the
next bump up in the standard.
And then we're also beginning to
see even more complex encoding
schemes than the variable bitrate
stuff that you see in MP3.
Specifically, you see codecs that you,
that,
encodings that are going to be doing
different techniques for data resiliency
when you transport it over the network.
New kinds of perceptual encoding
techniques that result in better,
smaller, faster, whatever.
But they're coming and we
need to be ready for them.
And then we also see, you know,
native processing is
just going to explode.
We're talking multi-processors.
I mean, it's like 4G, 4G.
You've got plenty of bandwidth
to burn for signal processing.
In addition to that,
we also see hardware acceleration
starting to take off.
In fact, on the PC platform,
it's already taken off
like crazy for games,
for doing 3D rendering.
We also see an increasing requirement for
tight synchronization with other media,
both internal media and
external to the box.
Increasingly,
we need to run machines in sync over a
network or in sync with a SMPTE deck.
We feel that all those features need to
be encompassed in any audio architecture
at the operating system level.
What is Core Audio?
What are we going to do
about all that stuff?
First, we're going to provide a new
low-level audio device API.
Specifically,
it's geared to allow you to read
and write data from a given device,
and to do that in a way that can
be shared across many processes.
Then, we're also going to do some
inter-application communication stuff,
so that you can have audio being
generated in one application and sent
to be processed in another application.
And then on Wednesday,
Chris Rogers went in-depth about
the new component model that
we're going to be supporting on
OS X and in other places as well,
the audio unit architecture.
And I hope you saw his talk because
you're going to hear a lot more about
that stuff as the year progresses.
And then probably the best news about
all this is that we're going to open
source all the low-level sources,
or the services.
We feel pretty strongly that
while we think we're pretty good,
we know what we're doing,
you guys have more knowledge
about the specific areas and more
knowledge about your specific
hardware so that you could tell us,
"Hey, you're not doing that right," or,
"You're not going to be able to support
my hardware." We really want to encourage
you to participate in what we're
trying to do and to make it better.
So this diagram kind of lays
out the way Core Audio is
being spread about the system.
Now down in the kernel you have I/O Kit.
That's where all the drivers live.
That's where all the hardware lives.
So the big problem with a
protected mode system like
this is how do you manage the,
how do you get the communication out
to the application so that you can move
the data fast enough and enough of it so
that you can do something useful with it.
So we're going to tackle that
with the Audio Device API.
It specifically manages moving data
to and over the kernel user boundary.
And it sits entirely itself,
entirely in user space.
It doesn't have a single part piece
of it that lives in the kernel.
And then it lives individually
within each client process
that's using it as well.
So each, so you link,
it's just another shared library.
And then on top of that,
while clients can directly
access the Audio Device API,
we only really expect to see that
done with clients that have a really
high degree of need for low level
control and management and whatnot.
Mostly we hope to see you using
audio units to deal with the hardware
as we'll be providing audio units
that completely wrap up the use of
the Audio Device API as well as the
audio IPC mechanisms that will allow
you to move data across processes.
completely in user space again.
So, what are the goals of
the Audio Device API?
So, like I said,
it's designed to be multi-client.
The Macintosh, since its inception,
has been able to play sound in
two applications simultaneously.
If we weren't able to do that in OS X,
that would be a huge step back.
So it's very important that multi-client
features be carried forward.
Further, we're supporting multi-channel.
Obviously,
we think surround sound is important.
We've got to be able to talk to devices
that have more than two channels.
And to be able to do that in
a way that has low latency,
so that when you say,
"Play this buffer," it gets out there on
the wire as fast as we can get it there.
The Audio Device API is designed
to have very low overhead.
Specifically, for the latency,
we depend very heavily on the
Core OS Scheduler to make sure that
the threads that have our code in
them run when they're supposed to run.
Then the latency will obviously also
depend on the transport layer you're
using to send the audio to the hardware.
It's like PCI has one kind of latency.
USB has a totally
different kind of latency.
Then another primary goal
is synchronization with
the Audio Device API.
It's very important that a device be able
to be synchronized with both internal
hardware and with external hardware.
Both SMPTE signals, digital clocks,
word clocks, Studio Sync, everything.
We're bringing that into the system.
Then finally,
we hope it sucks a little bit less.
Jim here.
So the data formats for
the Audio Device API,
well, it's pretty much format agnostic.
Now,
we do treat PCM data a little bit better
than we treat other kinds of data,
but by and large,
whatever your hardware wants to take,
the Audio Device API is prepared
to ask for it from the client code.
We pass every, all the data is passed
around in void stars,
and we don't make any
requirements about the data.
Now, if you do choose to use PCM,
the PCM format that we use
internally is 32-bit floats,
and we support both interleaved and
non-interleaved streams for PCM data.
And further,
we'll do all the mixing for you
internally if you're using PCM data.
Otherwise,
you pretty much have to rely on
the driver supporting mixing in
some fashion for other formats,
because we don't know how to do that,
and we're willing to let
the driver figure it out.
And further, with the 32-bit floats,
to actually convert into
the hardware format,
we also rely on the driver,
providing us a routine to do that.
So, conceptually,
a device in this model encapsulates
an I/O cycle to read and write
the data to the device and a
clock to keep track of that I/O.
And the clock generates timestamps
that specifically map out the
relationship between the host clock,
which in our case is
the CPU time register,
as specified by uptime,
and there are other system services on
OS X for retrieving that clock value,
and the sample clock of the hardware,
that is the counter that's
counting the samples going by.
It's really important to
know to a high degree,
as accurately as you can,
the relationship between when
a sample is played and the host
clock time that it was played at.
You'll see why in a few minutes.
Devices also have a set of properties.
Properties are used to describe the
state and configuration of a device.
They have getters and setters,
and they are specified
as selector value pairs.
The selector is an integer ID,
and the value is any format that
the property wishes to express.
Again,
it's expressed as a void star in the API.
Another big feature of properties
is that you can schedule the
driver to make the change to the
property for you ahead of time.
That way, if the driver supports it,
that gives you a way to do
sample accurate scheduling
with hardware changes.
This will be much more important as
FireWire devices start coming online.
Finally,
clients can register for notifications
in the changing of properties.
The notification mechanism
specifically will,
you will get a notification only
if the value changes and if it
changes anywhere on the system.
So if process A makes a change and
process B is looking for that change,
process B will get a notification
that process A changed that value.
So, on the inside,
what we have is a single ring
buffer that gets mapped by
I/O Kit into each client process.
Now, IO-Kit reads and writes to
this buffer asynchronously
from what the client's up to.
In fact,
it's usually done via DMA program.
We're trying to avoid having to
have any kernel threads actually
executing to do any audio
processing if we can at all help it.
And then the interrupts that
we get in this system are only
generated when the device driver
wraps back around the ring buffer.
Now, the size of the ring buffer
is typically fairly large.
In the current system,
it's about three-quarters of a second.
So you're going to only see the interrupt
rate for this system is extremely low.
Now, you all have a lot of questions,
I can tell.
So, every time the buffer wraps around,
we get a new timestamp for
when that wraparound happened.
And that timestamp comes out of the
sample clock and from the host clock.
And you can also get a
timestamp whenever you want.
So you can generate
more as you need them.
And sometimes those timestamps are
going to be interpolated because
we may not have specific data on
the time that you're asking for.
So we have code that keeps track
of the history of time and can
predict one value given the other.
In this diagram,
you kind of see what's going on
from the device's point of view.
So there's an input ring buffer
and an output ring buffer.
And the client is spinning around,
reading and writing to those buffers.
And the DMA heads chase those
heads around and clean up or
write new data after them.
And then, as you can see,
when the head gets back
to the interrupt point,
we'll raise an interrupt.
And at that point,
we'll generate some new timestamps.
And we'll do a few other
housecleaning chores.
But other than that,
we don't actually call out
to applications to get data.
That's a big difference to the way
systems have worked in the past.
So how do we get data to the system?
So from the client's point of view,
implicitly,
you're going to be doing a lot of
multi-threaded programming with audio.
Just be clear on that because
that's pretty complicated
and it's a lot different than
the Mac OS 9 implementation.
There are a lot of new issues
you're going to have to face
about atomic operations on data,
making sure that you're not
waiting on a semaphore that's not
ever going to get signaled on,
or the usual things that you have
to deal with when you're dealing
with a multi-threaded environment.
It's now coming to bear right on
you when you're dealing with audio.
So the client has one high
priority run to completion
thread per device in the process.
Now the client can give us the thread
and you can configure it however you want
with your own priorities or we will do
it on your behalf and we will set things
up so that we give you the appropriate
priority as well for the type of latency
that you're looking for in your I/O.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so the code that's running
in this thread needs to,
obviously, because it tends to be a
very high priority thread,
in fact,
audio tends to be one of the highest
priority threads in the system,
there's a high degree of,
there's a high chance that you
will lock the system up if you take
too much time in the I/O thread.
Consequently,
there are a number of things
you can do to alleviate that.
You can just not take so long.
That's a fine idea.
Optimize your code.
Perhaps the better strategy is if your
situation allows it to have a secondary
thread available that runs at a lower
priority than the audio thread that
you can use to generate or render your
audio or read it off the disk or get
it from the network or do whatever
you need to do to get your data and
process it and get it into a form that's
ready to be handed to the hardware.
Perhaps the better strategy is if
your situation allows it to have a
secondary thread available that runs
at a lower priority than the audio
thread that you can use to get your
data and process it and get it from
the network or do whatever you need
to do to get your data and process
it and get it into a form that's
ready to be handed to the hardware.
Now, in fact, if you do take up too much
time in your I/O thread,
first we're going to tell you about it.
We will send you a notification that
says your thread is taking too much time.
And you will also hear
glitches in your stream,
obviously,
because you're not generating the
audio at the right time to be played
so that the stream can be continuous.
The other sorts of issues
that you're going to see is...
You can lock the system up,
but still not panic the system.
The machine will just freeze,
and the only thing you
can do is a cold reboot.
Given that, the implementation of the
Audio Device API goes to great
lengths to keep that from happening,
to the point where it won't reschedule
your thread for you if it sees
that you're taking too much time.
So if you eat too much processor time,
we're going to scale
you back a little bit,
so that you're not starving
the rest of the system.
So what do you do in this thread?
Right?
And that's kind of an important question.
So the I/O thread is basically scheduled
to wake up periodically in a way,
and when it wakes up,
the idea is that you read your
input and you write to the output.
Now, the way we schedule the thread
to wake up is so that it kind of
simulates a double buffering situation.
That is, specifically, by default,
your thread will be scheduled to wake
up about a buffer ahead of the buffer
you're supposed to render for output.
This gives you roughly 100% of
CPU to do whatever it is you need
to do and still be able to deal,
to deliver the audio to the hardware on
time so that you have glitch-free audio.
Like I said, the input and output are
presented to you synchronously.
So when your I/O routine gets called,
you get both the input
data and the output data.
Further, you get timestamps that talk
about when that data was acquired
or when that data is going to
be inserted in the output stream.
And you get a third timestamp that tells
you what the current time is as well,
so you don't have to ask
and can potentially save a
little time in the I/O thread.
Now, the buffer size that you're using is
completely configurable by the client.
We can do this because we're just
writing into one shared ring buffer.
We just know that we need to
write that data at a certain space
ahead of the DMA read head so that
we keep the stream continuous.
The buffer size that you
use is entirely up to you.
You can make it as big
or as small as you want.
Obviously, you have trade-offs with
overhead in those terms.
The smaller the buffer size,
the more frequently we
need your thread to run.
Also, the more effect the jitter in the
thread wakeup is going to affect you.
For instance, if you want to render at,
say, 64 sample buffers,
that's roughly three or
four milliseconds of data.
Now, if the thread that you're using
to render that data has a jitter
of some number of microseconds,
obviously the smaller your buffer is,
the more that jitter number
is going to matter to you.
So another thing that's
configurable about this whole
process is the wake-up time.
So you can say how much time in
advance you want the thread to wake up.
You can make it as close to the
actual delivery time as you want,
provided you know,
have a good idea about how much time
about you take to deliver your data.
The general rule,
there are a lot of interesting
applications for that.
One reason you might want to go as
close to the delivery point as possible
is to be as responsive as possible
to interactive events like MIDI keys or
user interface events or user experience,
user interface devices and whatnot.
So given that those parameters
that you've told us how big
your buffer is and how far in
advance you want us to wake up,
we're going to have to
wait a little bit longer.
So the actual wake-up time that we
schedule the thread to wake up for
is then calculated using the previous
timestamps and the relationship
between the number of samples played
and how much host time has passed
in order to generate the appropriate
time to set to wake the thread up at.
[Transcript missing]
So,
I thought I'd finish this up by showing
you exactly how easy it is to write
a real live client with this stuff.
This code was adapted specifically
from the SDEV component that's used in
the Sound Manager to talk to this API.
So, first thing you got to do is you
got to find a device to talk to.
So, to do that,
you use a property of the entire system,
which is a little different than
a property for a specific device.
You can tell system routines
versus device routines by
the name of the routine.
System routines start audio hardware.
Device routines start audio device.
So, the first property you're
interested in is trying to find
out the default output device.
So, you call, get the system property for
the default output device.
Pretty simple.
Then you need to figure out what kind
of data you need to send to this device.
So to do that, you get the devices
stream format property.
Now the stream format in this API is
encompassed by the AudioStream
basic description struct.
It contains enough information
to describe any constant
bitrate format where all the
channels are the same width.
This applies to most of the general
compression techniques that you
see in the Sound Manager today,
like IMA, Linear PCM, MuLaw, A-Law,
all that stuff.
Now the struct will supply
you with the sample rate,
the number of bytes in a frame,
the number of bytes in the channel,
and the number of bytes in a packet if
the format has another grouping above the
sample frame and the channel structures.
More complicated formats obviously have
more information to talk about than just
how big their individual fields are.
For variable bitrate data,
you need to know where do the
frames actually start in the stream.
More complicated formats also provide
an extended description which is format
specific and is defined by that format.
That's also available via
another property on the device.
In order to do I/O,
you also need to know how
big your I/O buffer is.
In this case,
we don't really care what the I/O buffer
is because this is just a simple client.
He's just going to take whatever the
default buffer size is for this device.
Again, you just call audio device
get property to do that.
And one thing I should mention that
sizes in this API are almost always
passed around in terms of bytes.
And you can calculate
the number of frames,
if you can calculate the number
of frames for that format,
by getting the stream format
and doing the appropriate
math using the description in
the stream format descriptor.
So to start playback,
you need to tell the device
about your I/O routine.
So you install it by calling
audio device at I/O proc.
Now you also are given a
place to pass in a pointer to
whatever kind of data you want,
passed back to your I/O routine,
so you can, you know,
that's really useful for keeping
track of context on multiple,
well,
you all know how to use those things,
been around forever.
So, and then you start the, you see,
then you just start the
device by starting it.
There's a routine to start it.
And stopping a device is pretty
much the same but in reverse.
You call audio device stop,
and then if you're done with I/O,
you can remove the I/O proc as well.
Now, one thing I should point out that
you'll notice that with start
and stop that you also need to
pass in the I/O routine again.
Now,
the reason why is that you can install
multiple I/O routines on a given device.
I'm sure that there are a
lot of reasons to do that,
but it's just useful
for a number of things.
So here's the prototype
for the I/O routine.
When it's called,
you get the ID of the device
that the I/O is happening on.
You get a timestamp that represents now.
Like I said,
timestamps represent the mapping between
the sample time and the host clock.
You also get a pointer to the input
data and a timestamp for when the first
frame of that input data was acquired.
And then you get a pointer to the output
buffer and a timestamp for when the
first frame of the output buffer is going
to be inserted into the output stream.
And then you get back your
client data pointer as well.
And here's the entire
implementation of the I/O routine.
In my case, I'm using a My Nifty file
object in my client data field
so that I can get my data back,
so I can get some data to play.
And I cast that back, and then I use it,
and I put that data right
in the output buffer.
And then if I find out that I'm done,
I can just turn off that I/O routine.
And the semantics there is that
when you turn off an I/O routine
from during an I/O process,
that current I/O will complete,
and then no more I/O for
that routine will happen.
So,
when are we going to give this to you?
So, like I said,
the Sound Manager is in DP4 now.
It's been there since DP2.
The Audio Device API is also in DP4.
The IPC mechanism is going to be,
we're going to start seeding that prior
to the public beta and we'll hopefully
have it GMed for the public beta.
And then with the audio
units architecture,
we're looking at this fall for releasing.
We don't really have
anything specific there.
So next,
I'm just going to show you that it all
actually works and it's really alive.
First, I want to point out that the
music that you heard when you
came in was coming live off my
PowerBook using QuickTime Player on
OS X on top of the Audio Device API.
I think you can hear me.
So first up, I want to say in DP4,
by default, the Sound Manager is not set
up to use the Audio Device API.
You can add a magic
cookie to the framework,
and it's documented
on DP4 how to do that,
to make that actually happen.
But other than that,
there's one reason why all the demos
you've seen previous to this haven't been
running through the Audio Device API.
So first up,
I'd like to show just a reasonably
high frame rate QuickTime movie.
And the thing to watch for in
this one is synchronization.
The synchronization
is still pretty solid.
It's not 100% perfect yet,
but it's pretty good already.
"Gotta like that.
Alright.
And how about that?
The sound stopped right
when the movie did.
Thanks, Mark.
Right in sync.
Let's try that again."
Don't you love it?
You don't have to reboot.
Hey, and you don't have to reboot.
How about that?
Oh, another interesting thing about
the Audio Device API is you
don't have to reboot to reinstall
a new version of it either.
As long as you're not playing sound,
you can just put in a new version and go.
That's kind of neat.
It cuts down on the development time.
So, let's, you know,
once more from the top.
delivers 10 times out of 10.
Who's the cat that won't cop out?
Shea Ray.
They say I'm a complicated man.
I might take you down,
but I'll never let you down.
Who's the man who'd risk his
neck for his brother man?
Now, what's my name?
[Transcript missing]
Another thing I wanted to show you a
little bit was some of the benefits
of variable bitrate encoding.
You see some examples of some MP3 files
I've encoded using different kinds
of different data rates and whatnot.
First, I'd like to play the original.
I'm going to give you a feel for
what this sounds like before I give
you all the compressed versions.
Okay, of particular note,
you should hear the cymbal
sounds and what they sound like.
Kind of remember that
and try to figure out,
you know, which of these sound the best.
First,
let's start with the high data rate
version since those are the easiest.
Obviously,
they're going to sound relatively good.
And the relative difference
between variable bit rate and
constant bit rate starts to go
away when you use larger bit rates.
But they're still there.
I mean, if nothing else,
you get smaller files.
So here's the variable bit rate,
or here's the 128K
constant bit rate kind.
This is typically the format
you find on the Internet.
It sounds pretty close to the original.
And here's the variable bit,
the high-quality version
for this encoder of--
As you can see, the file size is a bit
smaller than the 128K size.
And again, you can hear it's still pretty
close to the original mix.
And in this case,
the savings are obvious.
Variable bitrate wins because
it's a smaller file size.
Just kind of an interesting aside,
the normal encoded version,
at least for this encoder,
wait for the variable bitrate to parse.
[Transcript missing]
This almost doesn't sound like a hi-hat.
Let's take a look at the variable bitrate
version in the lowest quality setting
that squeezes the most bits out of it.
In this case, again,
you see the file size is roughly
the same as the 64K version.
It depends on the, uh,
the actual content.
Hold that question.
So you can see the
low-quality version is much,
much better than the 64K version,
and you get the same file size.
So, you know, use VBR, I guess.
So to finish things up,
you need to contact Dan Brown to--
We're going to finish
things up and participate,
particularly if you want to
participate in the seeding program.
We're going to be seeding the core
audio services a lot quicker than
we've been running in the past.
We're hoping to keep things moving,
get things out into the open,
get you guys working with the stuff,
and working with us to make it
better so that we can actually
meet your needs for a change.
So contact Dan and he
can get that working.
So next we're going to finish
things up with a little Q&A,
but Bill has something to say first.